+++
title = "Shoe Rack"
slug = "shoe-rack"
date = 2025-07-29
description = "eliminate the mountain of shoes by the door."
[extra]
  toc = true
+++

# overview
Shoes accumulate near outside doors, it's just the way of things. When you have a bunch of outside doors, you have a bunch of shoe piles. The one in the mudroom was particularly egregious.

# process
* Measure your shoes. You don't need a rack larger than your largest shoes. This rack is built for men's size 13 or so, with a maximum height of 15-16"
* Most shelves don't need to be the height of your boots. Make one shelf for tall boots, one for mid boots, and many shelves for regular low shoes, which require not more than 8" clearance from the ground
* Weld up the frame, remembering to keep everything square (weld inside beads last to help with warping).
* Weld on large casters with brakes, all four corners
* Grind and sand the frame to clean it up
* (TBD) Paint frame
* Cut poplar shelves to size
* Finish poplar shelves with stain and polyurethane for water resistance
* Assemble, revel in order

I still have to do the finish work (painting, staining) and will update when that's done.

# photos
{{ img(id="/images/shoe-rack/rack-plan.jpg", alt="A sketch and cutlist for the shoe rack.") }}
{{ img(id="/images/shoe-rack/IMG_4577.jpg", alt="Building the shoe rack.") }}
{{ img(id="/images/shoe-rack/IMG_4579.jpg", alt="Building the shoe rack.") }}
{{ img(id="/images/shoe-rack/IMG_4582.jpg", alt="Building the shoe rack.") }}
{{ img(id="/images/shoe-rack/IMG_4592.jpg", alt="Building the shoe rack.") }}
{{ img(id="/images/shoe-rack/IMG_4594.jpg", alt="Building the shoe rack.") }}
{{ img(id="/images/shoe-rack/IMG_4599.jpg", alt="Building the shoe rack.") }}