+++
title = "wallet"
slug = "wallet"
date = 2025-01-14
description = "hold cards."
[extra]
  toc = true
+++

I've made a few of these now, but I never formalized the dimensions. It'll be easier to make with a die, so here's what I'll use as a reference inner dimension for that die:

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/wallet.png", alt="a dimensioned drawing of a wallet before assembly") }}

All dimensions are in millimeters.

If you want a PDF drawing, grab it [here](https://nnix.com/images/160.0bw/wallet.pdf).

An STL file of the same object is [here](https://nnix.com/images/160.0bw/wallet.STL).

Man, I don't know what else to say. This is a short one.

* Cut the material (leather, vegan leather, urethane) to the dimensions indicated.
* Thin the material at the midpoint between the 2mm triangles so it folds more easily.
* Fold the material and glue at the seams to anchor the folded layers in place where you'll pierce and sew.
* Pierce the material at each indicated stitch hole. Holes are 1mm in diameter and 4mm center-to-center.
* Sew together at each edge with kevlar thread & burn the ends to seal.
* Finish the edges of the material (Tokonole glue, burnishing).
* Use until it falls apart. This will be a very long time unless you keep washing it on heavy-duty cycle in your pants.

This holds five to six credit-card-sized objects. I usually carry two credit cards, one ID, and two RFID badges in it. Nobody needs cash any more.

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/wallet-flat.png", alt="a rendering of a wallet before assembly") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/wallet-folded.png", alt="a rendering of a wallet after assembly") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/wallet-folded-iso.png", alt="an isometric rendering of a wallet after assembly") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/die.jpeg", alt="the sharpened die, in real life") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/die-cutting.jpeg", alt="the die about to cut some leather") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/cut-folded.jpeg", alt="leather cut and folded to shape") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/punched.jpeg", alt="thread holes punched") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/finished-back.jpeg", alt="wallet stitched and edged") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.0bw/finished.jpeg", alt="wallet embossed") }}