+++
title = "dotfiles"
slug = "dotfiles"
date = 2025-01-24
description = "how I build my workstation environment."
[extra]
  toc = true
+++

I keep updated scripts for this [here](https://github.com/davidemerson/dotfiles.git)

There's a good guide on sway for Debian [here](https://wiki.debian.org/sway), since that's still a little new for me, coming from dwm and i3. As of Debian 12.9, it is possible to get stuck without a working system if you simply apt-get install sway on Debian, so keep that in mind.

I used to have an OpenBSD guide here, but I got tired of maintaining that, since I'm consistently disappointed with the desktop experience in OpenBSD. I love and support the project, just not its regular use as a workstation OS. This is a guide was last tested on Debian 12.9.

# procedure

In VMWare Workstation, remember to set the following:
* enable `Virtualize IOMMU` to ensure you don't have horrible keyboard lag
* enable `3D Acceleration` and give the guest something like 2GB VRAM allocation
* if it is available, enable `Enhanced Keyboard` so you don't have a lockscreen key combination conflict with Windows hosts

If you're going to fork this and make your own dotfiles, you might want to make a step before the cloning bit where you scp your ssh key to the workstation you're building so you can read/write the repo, and then push your changes back live. If you're just getting a system running, though, read alone is enough here.

Run through the standard Debian install. In `tasksel` or the installer, choose:

* Debian Standard Desktop
* GNOME
* SSH Server
* Standard System Utilities

GNOME/GDM will launch after the install log in as your user, start a terminal, `su` to root

as root, install git
```
apt update && apt install git
```

clone the repo
```
git clone https://github.com/davidemerson/dotfiles.git
cd dotfiles/
```

execute the provision.sh script
```
bash provision.sh
```

reboot
```
systemctl reboot
```

# notes
You'll note that my `.muttrc` and `.msmtprc` refer to `~/.secrets/mailpass` for credentials. This is a one liner file containing my mail app password, keeping it out of this repo, and allowing me to do things like encrypt it on disk. You can substitute any form of password management here, to accommodate your personal preferences.

In VMWare Workstation, I have to launch sway using `WLR_NO_HARDWARE_CURSORS=1 sway` because the VMWare SVGA II Adapter is meh.

If you're running on a Windows 10/11 host using some kind of hypervisor, my `$mod` settings in sway configuration conflict with the Windows lock command (Win+L). You can disable this in the Windows host by setting this registry key to "1":
```
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Winlogon\DisableLockWorkstation
```

# additional references
Check out how others have done this kind of thing, for inspiration and documentation:
* [agung-satria](https://github.com/agung-satria/debian-sway/), who helped a lot with my sway config here.
* [sohcahtoa](https://sohcahtoa.org.uk/openbsd.html), who has some excellent OpenBSD inspo.
* [jcs](https://jcs.org/2021/07/19/desktop), who has some excellent OpenBSD inspo.
* [daulton](https://daulton.ca/2018/08/openbsd-workstation/), who has some excellent OpenBSD inspo.
* [eradman](http://eradman.com/posts/openbsd-workstation.html), who has some excellent OpenBSD inspo.