+++
title = "welding cart"
slug = "welding-cart"
date = 2025-01-02
description = "the only way is to build your own."
[extra]
  toc = true
+++

# overview
I took up welding a couple years ago, and I upgraded my equipment recently, now that I almost know what I'm doing. The new unit is larger, it needs a cart when I move it around, and I have very little space in which to store said cart.

The welding carts which exist on the market are constrained by shipping (designs appropriate for flat-pack) and by cost (thin sheet metal, undersized dimensions).

This seems like an obvious, accessible project for someone looking to build their skills and house their tools at the same time.

# details
Overall height of the cart will be about 42" from floor to work surface on top. Overall length will be 36", and width 24".

The cart will have space to hold at least one 40 cubic foot gas cylinder, for when I need argon shielding gas.

There is a space reserved for a plasma cutter next to the multiprocess welding machine.

There are four 120VAC 20A receptacles for small appliances like grinders and sanders.

The topmost plate has two 1.5"x1.5"x0.125" angles welded to its bottom, then bolted to the rack frame. This allows it to be replaced as needed in the future, since it'll be subject to wear from welding.

I originally designed the topmost place (work surface) in perforated steel, to facilitate clamping through the perforations. I decided to go with solid plate instead because the perforated steel design allowed too much slag through to the lower shelf. I may use a mag drill in the future to place a few strategically located holes here and there for clamping, but a fully perforated plate is just too permeable.

The work surface is 0.375" thick plate, and weighs about 117lb, so it's a substantial mass. You could save about 35lb by specifying 0.250" plate, either is probably fine.

The whole cart is at a very convenient height for getting close to something while standing. I'm about 5'11" tall, so adjust accordingly if you're taller or shorter, but I like this height a lot for working

I'm working in inches on this project because steel locally is sold in inches, and it's hard to convert accurately when ordering.

Build commenced 1 January 2025. I didn't get to painting it yet, and I'm changing out the top from the design, but I'm not sure to what yet. Otherwise, it's in production as a cart. I would recommend this design, it makes a very comfortable place to work on a project while remaining mobile.

## drawing
{{ img(id="/images/160.w6b/cart-drawing.jpeg", alt="a pencil drawing of the first draft of a cart concept for welding supplies and a multiprocess welder and up to two gas cylinders") }}

## cutlist
<table><thead>
  <tr>
    <th>dimension</th>
    <th>type</th>
    <th>quantity</th>
  </tr></thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>28" ⥊ 38" ⥌</td>
    <td>0.375" steel plate</td>
    <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>24" ⥊ 28" ⥌</td>
    <td>0.125" steel sheet</td>
    <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>24" ⥊ 36" ⥌</td>
    <td>0.125" steel sheet</td>
    <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>38" ⥌</td>
    <td>1" x 1" x 0.125" angle steel</td>
    <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>38" ⥌</td>
    <td>2" x 2" x 0.125" angle steel</td>
    <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20" ⥌</td>
    <td>1.5" x 1.5" x 0.125" angle steel</td>
    <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>23" ⥌</td>
    <td>1.50" x 1.50" x 0.125" square tube steel</td>
    <td>9</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>36" ⥌</td>
    <td>1.50" x 1.50" x 0.125" square tube steel</td>
    <td>6</td>
  </tr>
</tbody></table>

## other bits
<table><thead>
  <tr>
    <th>thing</th>
    <th>spec</th>
    <th>quantity</th>
  </tr></thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>end caps</td>
    <td>for 1.50" x 1.50" x 0.125" square</td>
    <td>12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>casters</td>
    <td>max 4" OA ⥌</td>
    <td>4</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>some chain</td>
    <td>??</td>
    <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>a screw link</td>
    <td>??</td>
    <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>steel plug enclosure</td>
    <td>4-up, 120VAC 20A</td>
    <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>hospital-grade outlets</td>
    <td>2-up 120VAC 20A</td>
    <td>2</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>heavy-duty plug</td>
    <td>NEMA 5-15R</td>
    <td>1</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>electrical cable</td>
    <td>10AWG</td>
    <td>20 (feet)</td>
  </tr>
</tbody></table>

# photos
{{ img(id="/images/160.w6b/cuts.jpeg", alt="mild steel waiting to be welded into a cart") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.w6b/casters.jpeg", alt="self leveling casters for heavy machine tables") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.w6b/frame.jpeg", alt="a finished cart made of mild steel, with a welder and welder helmet on a shelf") }}

{{ img(id="/images/160.w6b/unpainted-finished.jpeg", alt="a finished cart made of mild steel, with a welder and welder helmet on a shelf") }}