+++
title = "migrating: shell house"
date = 2020-02-18
description = "a commissioned home design."
[extra]
  toc = true
+++

# overview
(coming soon, migrating from gemini)
# specifications
(coming soon, migrating from gemini)
# photos
(coming soon, migrating from gemini)
# conclusion
Your neighborhood is being taken over by the largest possible homes on every lot because that's the only profitable way to build a home. Furthermore, your neighborhood is being built in a homogeneous and likely "traditional" style because that increases the profitability of those houses. This profitability concern results in a product (housing) which is environmentally catastrophic, unaffordable to most, aesthetically uninteresting, and suboptimally planned.

Don't fall for any of this bullshit. Fforget about the treadmill of homeownership and lending. If you want to build a beautiful home without compromise, pay cash and plan to live in it until you die. If you just need a place to live and don't want it to be ugly, purchase an existing home which most closely approximates your aesthetic and renovate it as needed for your comfort (in cash).

The fact that mortgages are a relatively inexpensive form of debt is only useful up to the utility value of shelter, and should not be the mechanism by which you perpetrate a silly, tasteless scheme upon your neighbors for the sake of modest profit.

Finally, buy reasonably-sized modern homes like this second hand, if that's the kind of thing you're after. They depreciate like rocks, and you won't be the one holding the bag of constructions costs.